Cofer.
I forget what it is.
Dusty Butts.
D.B.
Dusty Butts Cofer.
Did you have one?
Fish Pierce or Fish Ferocious Pierce Pierce Pierce Pierce Pierce Pierce.
And Happy Hairy Hearth, I've heard.
No, I hadn't heard that one.
Let's see.
Did Abbott have one, John Paul?
Not that I know of.
He was a very distinguished man.
I mean, he was
He was really a very presentable man.
He was a gentleman and a scholar.
and much admired.
And when I met Robert Penn Warren, he asked after John Fall and spoke of him very favorably as one of his favorite students.
Had Dr. Abbott done work at Vanderbilt?
Is that where they overlapped?
Yeah.
I think he had a degree from Vanderbilt.
He was a doctor.
Dr. Abbott's specialty was what?
Special field.
I really, really don't remember.
Now, in those, in the 40s and 50s, were there many English, Aggie English majors?
No.
So that they're taking English as support courses.
Well, they were as a required course.
I mean, they, they had so many hours of liberal arts that they had to take and
So they had to take basic course and finally they got so they, I don't think they have to take any writing whatsoever now at A&M.
I think it's horrendous that they assume that they have learned something that they haven't learned.
How well prepared were these youngsters for their freshman English out of high school?
Well, it depended entirely on what kind of school they came from and what level they were in.
We were taking students from the bottom quartile of their class.
Did anybody ever raise a question with you or the department about the pass rate, flunk rate?
I've never heard of any argument.
I remember flunking
In the year that we had these midnight yell practices that went on to 4 o'clock in the morning, I remember flunking 20 out of 24 students in that freshman English class.
And the four English, four students that passed were all veterans who didn't have to go to midnight yell practice until 4 o'clock in the morning.
So they were the only ones that were wide awake at class.
I mean, 50 minutes of sleep was about, oh, most of them were capable of it, but nobody ever said any word to me about
I often had, in those early years, I had as many as 50% to 55% failure.
But nobody ever?
Nobody ever said anything to me.
The only, in the later years, the only time that we, I was, had questions about teaching was
We had a young man whose father was a very distinguished professor at another school.
I forget what his name was.
But he came down here, and he flunked everybody.
And I was asked to review a set of his papers.
And I said, well, you can't fault anything that the young man wrote.
But I said, he's grading these people as if they're graduate students.
He's expecting the level of a graduate student and a very bright graduate student.
And I said, I would hate to have him grade any of my work.
But that was the only time I ever recall.
When women came in, there were some teachers in the English department and other departments who refused to give women A's.
Even though they deserved them, they refused to give them A's.
There was such an uprising, not only among students in some case, but some of the teachers were just horrified.
And of course, the people that were most horrified were the mother's clubs, that their boys would associate with women who would corrupt them.
And then a year afterwards, when we took in the blacks, nothing was said because we'd already hit rock bottom with women.
which I thought was horrible.
I thought that was the best step A&M ever took was to admit women.
That's up in the 60s now.
What do you think was the basic faculty attitude at A&M about coeducation?
It was mixed.
There were some of us who thought it was the best thing that ever happened and wondered why it hadn't happened before.
And some of the people were just simply horrified and refused almost to teach women.
But if there had been a vote, what do you think the vote would have been?
I think it would have, might have been 50%.
Oh really?
Yeah.
I think some of the teachers were afraid of women.
At first, the undergraduate courses were open to women who were a dependent of a student or an employee.
Yeah.
Describe in your own classes those first years with women.
How were they, how did it occur in class?
I don't recall necessarily.
There weren't that many women at that time, and I may not have had any at that time, but I had some excellent women.
I also taught extension courses at times for secretaries and things like that, and most of them were very bright.
What about with blacks?
Do you remember any problems at all?
Well, I had trouble with only one black student that I can recall, the others I got along well with.
This one black student was a hotshot basketball.
He had been a junior college transfer and he had been a hotshot.
He thought he didn't have to do anything in my class, and I got in touch with
Jerry, I forget who he was.
He was Phi Beta Kappa with one of the coaches.
Oh, Jerry Kleyburn.
Jerry Kleyburn.
He was with Mayor Bryant.
Yeah.
I got in touch with Jerry and told him, I said, I don't know whether you care about this student or not, but you're going to have to get him straight or he's going to flunk.
And I said, I'm going to kick him out of the class.
And so Jerry tried to talk to him, but never had any success.
And he never made any effort.
And we had a very strict gut rule in speech.
And he didn't show up.
And so I flunked him and told him, no point in you coming after this.
What were your basic guidelines in teaching?
In turn, your basic philosophy and your guidelines about attendance and makeup tests and so forth?
Well, for one thing, I didn't have much faith in tests and in speech and creative writing where I was director of both.
I didn't require examinations because I remember the one semester I taught in high school was students demanded an examination.
And so I said, all right, I'll give you the questions in advance.
I'll let you have the open textbook.
And I said, I'll still bet I could flunk 90 percent of you legitimately.
And so I gave them open textbook examination of questions in advance, and then I showed them how I could flunk them on the language, choice of language, grammar, punctuation, things like that.
So I never required tests for those areas.
And as I said,
I didn't believe in tests too much with especially grading other people's examinations when their requirements were different.
Frediak felt demanded everything in the first sentence identifying the whole thing.
Somebody else wanted that at the end and sort of bibliography and so on.
And I was sort of in the middle ground, but what I tried to do was
For example, in the so-called public speaking course, I said, now, we call this public speaking, but it's very doubtful that many of you are ever going to make public speeches.
But I said, you are going to talk a hundred times during a given day.
And you're going to discuss many different things.
And in some great many cases, you're going to be interrupted.
So I said, what my philosophy is, is for you to talk about what you know in a simple, direct, straightforward manner and that you
have a beginning, a middle, and an end, but if somebody interrupts you, that you make a note of where you left off and pick it up so that if you're interrupted, then you can pick up and go on.
And I said, if you can talk about what you know and
The rest of the time, keep your mouth shut.
You'll be all right.
I said, of course, I can't do that, but keep my mouth shut.
When you did the basic English courses, you did have tests there.
Oh, yes.
And what was your philosophy about class attendance and makeup tests and so forth?
We did what we were required, and so I was willing to give tests and take them.
There were several problems that came up, though.
I remember one time we were in the academic building.
I was giving a final examination, and one boy stood up and started laughing, and I thought, well, I never saw any humor in this final examination, and then he fell on the floor and started to have a seizure.
And he was obviously an epileptic, and I didn't know about it.
And so I went and got Bo Hedgecock, whose son had been an epileptic.
And he came and helped get the student and straightened out so he wouldn't hurt himself.
And we sent for an ambulance, and the student was carted off.
And so I—then we went on with the exam.
I didn't grade the last third of the examination for the students.
After that, I thought, my God, how can you answer an exam after that experience?
And so I graded the students on the first part.
Another time, we gave a 203 examination.
We must have had 700 students in one of the big halls in Cebiza in giving a 203 examination.
And the chairman of the course, who discovered that the 203 exams had been stolen,
They had a whole stack of them in this one mail room, and somebody had gotten in and stolen hundreds of them, so we didn't have enough to pass out.
You could go to the exam that morning.
I had breakfast at Aggieland Inn that morning.
You could see students having coffee and reading the 203 exam.
You could see them walking along the street with them, and I thought, well, you brothers, you're going to
going to have trouble here because we had substituted the substitute exam because we had copies of that.
What was their reaction?
Well, that was the funny part.
Some of the people came up to us who were proctoring an exam and they said, are you sure this is the right examination?
And some of them never knew it.
In other words, they didn't even read the exam.
They had their papers already written in advance.
They handed in their blue books, which they had done in advance.
They had never even read the exam.
Some of them stayed only a minimum amount of time, you know, and then handed in their books and went out without ever realizing it.
Most thought it was most unfair that we had given different examinations.
We found out later that the exams had originally sold for five dollars and then it got smaller and smaller amount and finally they were given away.
The department leadership in the 50s went to Dr. Abbott, who the department head, from Mayo to whom?
To Morgan?
No, Mayo to Morgan and then I think Dr. Anderson.
John Q?
John Q. Anderson.
Oh, describe him because he's here when I got here.
Q was a shock to everybody when John Q was made hit because they expected—I think John Hayes expected to be offered it and was insulted when he wasn't.
And Freddy Eckfeldt thought to be offered it, and there were a whole line of them that expected it, you know, or be considered, and then I think
The dean or somebody had jumped John Q. Anderson over the whole field because of the publications.
And he was into folklore and many people claimed that his wife did half of his work and that he was using his students' work and putting his name to it too.
And there were all kinds of charges like that that I didn't know anything about.
But anyhow, I had several duties, such as I was on the Schedule Committee, things like that, and chairman of, I guess, speech by then.
And I went in and told him I would resign in my courses so he can appoint his own people.
And he said, for God's sake, don't.
He said, I'm running scared.
He says, I need all the help I can get.
And I said, well, as long as you have that attitude, I'll stay on and help you.
And he was the kind, if you did one job and did it well, you got the next one that came along.
And you kept the first one.
So under J.Q., I was chairman of the speech, chairman of creative writing.
I was director of scheduling and finally did all of the scheduling without any help.
I assigned all of the classroom, all of the offices, helped with the
Some of the reports, things like that.
And taught how much?
Fifteen hours.
Still, you had that plus the two.
And then under the next three heads, and then came Lee Martin.
And under Lee, I kept all of the, he was my best friend at the time.
And I kept all of my old jobs and added some new acting head when he wasn't there.
And then when he died, I was acting head.
He went off to Mexico, and I was acting head for two weeks.
And then when my appointment was about to end, I got a call from his home.
And I didn't realize he was back.
And I got there, and he was sick in bed.
And so he said, you'll have to go on as acting head for the rest of the semester probably.
And so I was acting head all that semester.
When was that?
All that summer session.
Do you remember when that was?
No, I don't remember the year exactly.
Eighties?
Seventies?
I have no recall.
I'll be honest with you.
Anyhow, I was acting head all that summer.
I taught my six weeks of class, and then the other was without pay for it.
I did it.
Then Harry Hearth was made head, and they were trying to bring in somebody from outside.
I think Maxwell was dean at the time, and he wanted to bring in somebody from outside.
Costa had a former head that he tried to bring in, and he was president of some school.
And I asked him, why would the president of a school want to become a department head?
And he said, well, so I can get my work done.
I said, in other words, you're going to be a department head and somebody like me is going to do your work.
And you're going to do your work and not the department's work.
And he didn't deny it.
He says, sounds to me like you already have made up your mind that you have somebody you'd like to hire.
I said, that's absolutely true.
And everybody sitting around nodded too.
I said, Harry Hearth.
And so we ended up with Harry Hearth's head.
And then when Harry got sick, we had— Describe Dr. Hearth as department chairman.
I might end up describing myself in some respects because one department member said when I told him to go, if you don't like my decision, I go check with Harry Hurst.
And he said, well, huh.
It's like asking me to go to somebody like you.
He said, you're two peas in the pod.
And we had mostly the same set of values.
We both tried to do what was best for the department, the school and the faculty and the students.
I mean, we tried to do what was best.
And some teachers were satisfied and some were just satisfied.
We had one malcontent who later never liked anything that we did.
who later said, those were the golden years.
And so I think in some respect, during Harry's tenure, they were the golden years.
Because he was, in many respects, like Dr. Mayo, a very equitable man and a very generous man with his time.
And I think he tried to do the best for everyone.
stepping back in the 50s, late 50s, Earl Rudder is brought over here as the new president.
How much did the changes in deans and presidents affect what was really happening in the English department?
Well, under John Q. Anderson, quit because of Rudder.
Really?
Yes.
How so?
Describe that.
Well, what happened was that the registrar's office had told us we were going to get this tremendous increase in enrollment.
And so we had hired three new people, three or four new people.
And then when the actual enrollment came in,
We had lost people instead of having this tremendous increase.
And so Rudder, one of these new people, fired.
And John refused to fire him.
Said we'd hired him in good faith.
And then, of course, the people were let go the next semester.
But that was a bone of contention.
John quit under him because Rudder, of course, was looking at the bottom line and we didn't need them.
But John was a man of conscience.
How much did you and your colleagues see of Earl Rudder as president?
How often were you?
Well, I saw more of his dog.
He had this bulldog that came to class, Sol Sarge, wasn't it, or something like that.
He would come and sit in my class and he was a better student and some of them paid more attention.
But I saw Rudder once, they have these summer, what do they call these freshman camps?
Fish camp.
Fish camps.
I was asked to speak.
at one of the fish camps and Rudder and I flew from Easterwood in University Plain and that was the first time I really talked to him personally was on this plane and Smith was a pilot I forget what his first name was and we flew from there to wherever the fish camp was in East Texas
And I remember Reagan Brown was also on that,
What was your impression of Mr. Rutter in that conversation?
Well, the thing I remember, he was reading a magazine most of the time, and there was a cartoon in the magazine that delighted him, and he showed it to me.
It was two cartoons, actually, that were related.
It showed a couple on a desert island and in the first picture the girl is very trim and the man is pot-bellied and in the second picture the man is very trim and the girl is pot-bellied on the desert island.
And that delighted him, and we had a pleasant conversation.
I don't know what we talked about after that, but we got along well.
And I remember asking him questions at the liberal arts meeting when he addressed the faculty.
And I remembered once asking what percentage of black students we had.
And he said, I don't know, and I don't want to know.
And that was one of the times that—and the next time I asked him a question about what the salary ranges were in the different ranks and he seemed surprised that I didn't know.
And Bloody Morgan was sitting right ahead of me and he was department head at the time and his neck got real red and afterwards he said,
You embarrassed the president.
I said, no, I embarrassed you because you hadn't told us.
So he finally had to tell us what the ranges were.
Those great changes that were made at A&M under Mr. Rutter, did you and your colleagues give him credit for being the leader of those changes?
Some people wouldn't give him credit for anything.
Some people thought he did a very good job.
I was not impressed at first, but I ended up being impressed by the man.
I thought he didn't.
I thought that really it took a man like General Rudder to get by with making the core non-requirement.
We would have stayed on that plateau of 5,000 students that we reached and stayed on for a long time.
We would still be there if that high, if it wasn't for that change.
And then the second change, women.
We became a university and the English department started having majors and graduate program and all that.
It all took place under him.
I don't think he was a scholar or really academically oriented, but I think he did what had to be done and should be done.
And I ended up thinking he was a remarkable man.
And at about the same time he came, Frank Hubert came as dean.
What did you and your colleagues think of him?
Well, again, there was a mixed opinion.
I got along very well with Frank.
And I had to see him on some of the different hats I was wearing in the department.
I had to go talk to him.
And one of them, I remember, was about Dr. Greer.
And Bloody Morgan had told me that I could—that was one time I was told what I was supposed to give in the way of a schedule.
He said, you will give him 104 and nothing else.
I said, well, it's terrible to put him in with freshmen.
I tried to oppose it.
When I was told I couldn't oppose it, I finally went to see Dean Hubert.
I said, now, Dr. Morgan has told me I can give this man only freshman English.
We can't do that to freshman students."
I said, he doesn't teach and he's an impossible man.
So I ended up, I think, giving him a broom closet in the dean's office and giving him some kind of a job to get him out of the classroom and that should have been done years before.
I don't say that I was responsible for doing it because I wasn't the only one who was complaining but it just reached a point of impossibility.
He was the closest thing we had at the time to a Shakespeare scholar and he wasn't given 212 Shakespeare.
Now at about that time Mr. Rudder dies.
Jack Williams comes as president and arts and science is divided into a number of colleges and Dave Maxwell becomes the dean.
Williams learned about communications ten years after the fact and he wanted to divide
the English department up and send part of them to journalism and create a communication department.
You're saying Williams did?
Williams did.
We were going to end up with, I think freshman English was going to be divided into something and all that.
And when Dave Stewart came, I again was acting head because Harry was in the hospital.
And so I was supposed to teach him the ropes.
And so one thing that I really admired about Dave was I told him, I said, now you're going to have to have a fight on your hands with the president.
Because he wants, you may end up without any freshman, without any technical writing, without any speech, and so on.
And I said, you better go talk to him.
And so he took off and he nipped a lot of those original changes in the bud at that time.
Did Dave Maxwell have a part in any of that either?
I don't know.
I got along very well with Maxwell.
because he was a man that you could object.
I'm a great objector.
He and I had one run in right at the start.